Agile teams like to ask tough questions, members are open to improvement.
How should team members think of sprints, in order to begin developing a true agile mindset? They should think about why short sprints improve the team's agility. Thinking about the "whys" is the best way to focus on the reasoning behind agile, and adopt an agile mindset.
You are keeping in mind the Cone of Uncertainty as you manage a software development project. Which factors regarding changes must you consider? Most changes are needed at the narrowest part of the cone, where it is also the most expensive to make changes. Only as the cone narrows can you determine whether changes should be made; but by this time, you have already expended time and resources.
What do managers typically find the most challenging? When knowledge workers try to come up with the delivery plan. Knowledge workers sometimes try to take on the actual delivery plan instead of focusing on the development process. But it's the manager's job to build the plan.
Which of the following is a common mistake teams make when trying to use an agile approach? Focusing on eliminating rework. This is a common mistake made by agile teams, whereas they should be looking at a different way to think about working.

Agile Principles 5 and 11 describe small, motivated, and self-organized teams. What is the important take-away from these two principles? Agile teams should be small and use generalists who work together to deliver the product. This provides a more rapid and collaborative way to move a project along. 
Raul just started working on an agile team. One of the first things the team did was to review the Agile Manifesto. Which value would an agile mindset favor over process and tools? Individuals and Interactions. An agile mindset is focused on why we work the way we do, versus just tools and processes.
Which agile principle is about reflecting on work and behavior? Principle 12. This principle is used at regular intervals by reflecting on how to become more effective, and then tuning and adjusting its behavior accordingly.